Copyright (c) 2014-2019 Andreas Franck a.franck@soton.ac.uk --- All rights reserved.
Copyright (c) 2014-2019 Institute of Sound and Vibration Research, University of Southampton and VISR contributors --- All rights reserved.

# Overview

The VISR framework is a collection of software for audio processing.
In this extensible software framework, complex audio algorithms can be formed by interconnecting existing building blocks, termed components. 

It can be used either interactively in the Python language, in custom applications (for instance in written C++, or integrated into other applications, for instance as DAW plugins or Max/MSP externals. While the VISR provides several renderers and building blocks for spatial and object-based audio, it is nonetheless a generic audio processing framework that can be used in other applications, for example array processing or hearing aid prototypes. The Python integration makes the system accessible, and enables easy algorithm development and prototyping.

Development of this project has been supported by the EPSRC Programme Grant S3A: Future Spatial Audio for an Immersive Listener Experience at Home (EP/L000539/1) http://www.s3a-spatialaudio.org and the BBC as part of the BBC Audio Research Partnership.

# Citing the VISR framework

We kindly ask to acknowledge the use of this software in publications or software.

Andreas Franck and Filippo Maria Fazi, “VISR – A versatile open software framework for audio signal processing,” in Proc. Audio Eng. Soc. 2018 Int. Conf. Spatial Reproduction, Tokyo, Japan, 2018.

# Contributors

Specific parts of the software have been provided by other groups as listed in the file Contributors.md

# Contributing

Contributions to the project are welcome -- through comments, feature requests bug reports or code contributions.

## Bug reports and feature requests

Please submit feature recommendations and bugs through GitHub's issue tracking system.

# Code contributions

Code contributions are handled through GitHub pull requests.
Please see [this article](https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/) for an introduction to pull requests.

Contributors are required to sign a Contributor License agreement (CLA).
This is to ensure that all contributions can be distributed under the same licence terms as the original project.
For more information, see for example this [article](http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/cla).
CLA templates can be found in the `doc/contributing` subdirectory of the repository.

# License

The software is provided under the permissive ISC (Internet Systems Consortium) printed below and in the Licence.md file

ISC (Internet Systems Consortium) License
https://www.isc.org/downloads/software-support-policy/isc-license/

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
 copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH
REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND
FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM
LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR
OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

# Licences of third-party software

This software uses the following external software components subject to the following licenses:

## Boost

Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization
obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by
this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute,
execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the
Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to
do so, all subject to the following:

The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including
the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer,
must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and
all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative
works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by
a source language processor.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

## PortAudio

Copyright (c) 1999-2002 Ross Bencina and Phil Burk

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files
(the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction,
including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge,
publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software,
and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR
ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF
CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

The text above constitutes the entire PortAudio license; however,
the PortAudio community also makes the following non-binding requests:

Any person wishing to distribute modifications to the Software is
requested to send the modifications to the original developer so that
they can be incorporated into the canonical version. It is also
requested that these non-binding requests be included along with the
license above.

## SNDFILE

Copyright (C) 1999-2011Erik de Castro Lopo <erikd@mega-nerd.com>

Project page: http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile
License statement: http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile/#Licensing

libsndfile is released under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License, of which there are two versions; version 2.1 (http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.html) and version 3 (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lesser.html). To maximise the compatibility of libsndfile, the user may choose to use libsndfile under either of the above two licenses.

Sndfile libraries uses the FLAC, OGG and VORBIS libraries, whose licenses are shown below.

## FLAC - Free Lossless Audio Codec

https://xiph.org/flac/license.html

Copyright (C) 2001,2002,2003,2004,2005,2006,2007  Josh Coalson

FLAC is comprised of several
components distributed under difference licenses.  The codec libraries
are distributed under Xiph.Org's BSD-like license (see the file
COPYING.Xiph in this distribution).  All other programs, libraries, and
plugins are distributed under the LGPL or GPL (see COPYING.LGPL and
COPYING.GPL).  The documentation is distributed under the Gnu FDL (see
COPYING.FDL).  Each file in the FLAC distribution contains at the top the
terms under which it may be distributed.
Since this particular file is relevant to all components of FLAC,
it may be distributed under the Xiph.Org license, which is the least
restrictive of those mentioned above.  See the file COPYING.Xiph in this
distribution.


## VORBIS

https://svn.xiph.org/trunk/vorbis/COPYING

Copyright (c) 2002-2015 Xiph.org Foundation

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Neither the name of the Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its
contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION
OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.



## OGG

https://svn.xiph.org/trunk/ogg/COPYING

Copyright (c) 2002, Xiph.org Foundation

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Neither the name of the Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its
contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION
OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.


## FFTS

https://github.com/anthonix/ffts

 Copyright (c) 2012, Anthony M. Blake
 All rights reserved.

 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
 	* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 		notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
 	* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 		notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
 		documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
 	* Neither the name of the organization nor the
	  names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products
 		derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
 ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
 WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
 DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL ANTHONY M. BLAKE BE LIABLE FOR ANY
 DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
 (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
 LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
 ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
 (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
 SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## KissFFT

Copyright (c) 2003-2010 Mark Borgerding

https://sourceforge.net/projects/kissfft/
https://github.com/mborgerding/kissfft

SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause

All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification,
 are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
      this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
      this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
      and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
    * Neither the author nor the names of any contributors may be used to endorse or
      promote products derived from this software without specific prior written
      permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON
ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## pybind11

https://github.com/pybind/pybind11

Copyright (c) 2016 Wenzel Jakob <wenzel.jakob@epfl.ch>, All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
   list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
   this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
   and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors
   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
   without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Please also refer to the file CONTRIBUTING.md, which clarifies licensing of
external contributions to this project including patches, pull requests, etc.
